Create Osiris scripts (#34257)
mantidproject/mantid: docs/source/techniques/ISISPowder-OSIRIS-v1.rst

.. _isis-powder-diffraction-osiris-ref:

=====================================================
ISIS Powder Diffraction Scripts - OSIRIS Reference
=====================================================

.. contents:: Table of Contents
    :local:

.. _creating_osiris_object_isis-powder-diffraction-ref:

Creating OSIRIS Object
------------------------

> This method assumes you are familiar with the concept of objects in Python.

Reviewer: would it be better to say something like:

This document assumes a familiarity with :ref:`intro_to_objects-isis-powder-diffraction-ref`

If not more details can be read here: :ref:`intro_to_objects-isis-powder-diffraction-ref`

To create a OSIRIS object the following parameters are required:

- :ref:`calibration_directory_osiris_isis-powder-diffraction-ref`
- :ref:`output_directory_osiris_isis-powder-diffraction-ref`
- :ref:`user_name_osiris_isis-powder-diffraction-ref`

Optionally a configuration file may be specified if one exists
using the following parameter:

- :ref:`config_file_osiris_isis-powder-diffraction-ref`

See :ref:`configuration_files_isis-powder-diffraction-ref`
on YAML configuration files for more details

Example
^^^^^^^

..  code-block:: python

  from isis_powder.osiris import Osiris

  calibration_dir = r"C:\path\to\calibration_dir"
  output_dir = r"C:\path\to\output_dir"
  config_dir = r"C:\path\to\config.yaml"

  osiris_example = Osiris(user_name="Calib",
                          calibration_directory=calibration_dir,
                          output_directory=output_dir,
                          config_file=config_dir)

> 

Reviewer: can we test the output?

Author: for this block there isn't really an output to test.

Methods
--------
The following methods can be executed on a OSIRIS object:

- :ref:`run_diffraction_focusing_osiris_isis-powder-diffraction-ref`

For information on creating a OSIRIS object see:
:ref:`creating_osiris_object_isis-powder-diffraction-ref`

.. _run_diffraction_focusing_osiris_isis-powder-diffraction-ref:

run_diffraction_focusing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The *diffraction_focusing* method allows a user to process a series of runs into a

> focused dSpacing workspace. Whilst processing the runs the scripts can apply any corrections

Reviewer: ```suggestion
focused dSpace workspace. Whilst processing the runs the scripts can apply any corrections
```

the user enables.

On OSIRIS the following parameters are required when executing *create_vanadium*:

- :ref:`calibration_mapping_file_osiris_isis-powder-diffraction-ref`
- :ref:`vanadium_normalisation_osiris_isis-powder-diffraction-ref`
- :ref:`subtract_empty_instrument_osiris_isis-powder-diffraction-ref`
- :ref:`merge_drange_osiris_isis-powder-diffraction-ref`

Example
=======
..  code-block:: python

  # Notice how the filename ends with .yaml
  cal_mapping_file = r"C:\path\to\cal_mapping.yaml"

  osiris_example.run_diffraction_focusing(run_number="119977-119988",
                                          merge_drange=True,
                                          subtract_empty_instrument=True,
                                          vanadium_normalisation=True,
                                          calibration_mapping_file=cal_mapping_file)
.. _calibration_mapping_osiris-isis-powder-ref:

Calibration Mapping File
-------------------------
The calibration mapping file holds the mapping between

> run numbers, current label, offset filename and the empty

Reviewer: the double and makes this a bit tricky to read. Could we get rid of one?

and vanadium numbers.

For more details on the calibration mapping file see:
:ref:`cycle_mapping_files_isis-powder-diffraction-ref`

The layout on OSIRIS should look as follows for each block

> substituting the below values for appropriate values:

Reviewer: is this sentence needed? The previous one says that the layout is an example, so implies that the values will change

.. code-block:: yaml
  :linenos:

  1-120:
    label: "1_1"
    offset_file_name: "offset_file.cal"
    vanadium_drange1 : "13"
    vanadium_drange2 : "14"
    vanadium_drange3 : "15"
    vanadium_drange4 : "16"
    vanadium_drange5 : "17"
    vanadium_drange6 : "18"
    vanadium_drange7 : "19"
    vanadium_drange8 : "20"
    vanadium_drange9 : "21"
    vanadium_drange10 : "22"
    vanadium_drange11 : "23"
    vanadium_drange12 : "24"
    vanadium_run_numbers : "13-24"
    empty_drange1 : "1"
    empty_drange2 : "2"
    empty_drange3 : "3"
    empty_drange4 : "4"
    empty_drange5 : "5"
    empty_drange6 : "6"
    empty_drange7 : "7"
    empty_drange8 : "8"
    empty_drange9 : "9"
    empty_drange10 : "10"
    empty_drange11 : "11"
    empty_drange12 : "12"
    empty_run_numbers : "1-12"

> for each set of run numbers the associated vanadium and empty runs for each drange must be listed for their drange.

Reviewer: I dont understand what you mean by "each drange must be listed for their drange"

Reviewer: could we update the doc to your comment? It is much clearer and easier to understand

Parameters
-----------
The following parameters for OSIRIS are intended for regular use
when using the ISIS Powder scripts.

.. _calibration_directory_osiris_isis-powder-diffraction-ref:

calibration_directory
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
This parameter should be the full path to the calibration folder.
Within the folder the following should be present:

- Grouping .cal file (see: :ref:`grouping_file_name_osiris_isis-powder-diffraction-ref`)
- Folder(s) with the label name specified in mapping file (e.g. "1_1")

>   - Inside each folder should be the offset file with name specified in mapping file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Inside each folder should be the offset file with name specified in the mapping file
```

Example Input:

..  code-block:: python

  osiris_example = Osiris(calibration_directory=r"C:\path\to\calibration_dir", ...)

.. _calibration_mapping_file_osiris_isis-powder-diffraction-ref:

calibration_mapping_file
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
This parameter gives the full path to the YAML file containing the
calibration mapping. For more details on this file see:
:ref:`calibration_mapping_osiris-isis-powder-ref`

> *Note: This should be the full path to the file including extension*

Reviewer: the full absolute path?

Author: yes as shown in the example

.. _config_file_osiris_isis-powder-diffraction-ref:

config_file
^^^^^^^^^^^
The full path to the YAML configuration file. This file is
described in detail here: :ref:`configuration_files_isis-powder-diffraction-ref`
It is recommended to set this parameter at object creation instead
of on a method as it will warn if any parameters are overridden
in the scripting window.

*Note: This should be the full path to the file including extension*

Example Input:

..  code-block:: python

  # Notice the filename always ends in .yaml
  osiris_example = Osiris(config_file=r"C:\path\to\file\configuration.yaml", ...)

.. _do_van_normalisation_osiris_isis-powder-diffraction-ref:

do_van_normalisation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Indicates whether to divide the focused workspace within
:ref:`diffraction_focusing_osiris_isis-powder-diffraction-ref` mode with an
associated vanadium run.

Accepted values are: **True** or **False**

Example Input:

..  code-block:: python

  osiris_example = Osiris(do_van_normalisation=True, ...)

.. _file_ext_osiris_isis-powder-diffraction-ref:

file_ext
^^^^^^^^
*Optional*

> Specifies a file extension to use when using the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specifies a file extension to use for the
```

:ref:`diffraction_focusing_osiris_isis-powder-diffraction-ref` method.

This should be used to process partial runs. When
processing full runs (i.e. completed runs) it should not
be specified as Mantid will automatically determine the
best extension to use.

*Note: A leading dot (.) is not required but
is preferred for readability*

Example Input:

..  code-block:: python

  osiris_example = Osiris(file_ext=".s01", ...)

.. _merge_drange_osiris_isis_powder-diffraction-ref:

merge_drange
^^^^^^^^^^^^
Indicates whether to merge summed workspaces of different dranges after running the
:ref:`diffraction_focusing_osiris_isis-powder-diffraction-ref` method.

Accepted values are: **True** or **False**

Example Input:

..  code-block:: python

  osiris_example = Osiris(merge_drange=True, ...)

.. _run_number_osiris_isis-powder-diffraction-ref:

run_number
^^^^^^^^^^
Specifies the run number(s) to process when calling the
:ref:`focus_osiris_isis-powder-diffraction-ref` method.

This parameter accepts a single value or a range
of values with the following syntax:

> **-** : Indicates a range of runs inclusive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**-** : Indicates an inclusive range of runs 
```

(e.g. *1-10* would process 1, 2, 3....8, 9, 10)

**,** : Indicates a gap between runs
(e.g. *1, 3, 5, 7* would process run numbers 1, 3, 5, 7)

These can be combined like so:
*1-3, 5, 8-10* would process run numbers 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 9, 10.

In addition the :ref:`input_mode_osiris_isis-powder-diffraction-ref`
parameter determines what effect a range of inputs has
on the data to be processed

Example Input:

..  code-block:: python

  # Process run number 1, 3, 5, 6, 7
  osiris_example = Osiris(run_number="1, 3, 5-7", ...)
  # Or just a single run
  osiris_example = Osiris(run_number=100, ...)

.. _user_name_osiris_isis-powder-diffraction-ref:

user_name
^^^^^^^^^
Specifies the name of the current user when creating a
new OSIRIS object. This is only used when saving data to
sort data into respective user folders.
See :ref:`output_directory_osiris_isis-powder-diffraction-ref`
for more details.

Example Input:

..  code-block:: python

  osiris_example = Osiris(user_name="Mantid", ...)

.. _subtract_empty_instrument_osiris_isis-powder-diffraction-ref:

subtract_empty_instrument
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Provides the option to disable subtracting empty instrument runs from

> the run being focused. This is useful for focusing empties, as

Reviewer: whats this stuff about empties? I do not follow

    empty_drange12 : "12"
    empty_run_numbers : "1-12"

> For each drange an empty canisters and vanadium run must be listed with the associated drange.

Reviewer: I think it should be:

For each drange any empty canisters and vanadium runs must be listed with the associated drange.
